---
title: GSoC blog - Episode I
tags: [GSoC]
style: fill
color: info
description: Part I of the GSoC trilogy.
---

I got selected for Google Summer of Code 2020 under the GNU(**G**NU's **N**ot **U**nix) project for [Gnuastro program](https://www.gnu.org/savannah-checkouts/gnu/gnuastro/gnuastro.html). 
My mentor for this project is [Mohammad Akhlaghi](https://akhlaghi.org/), whose valuable tips and suggestions are always going to stick in my code henceforth:-)

{% include elements/highlight.html text="It might be a bit long so hang in tight." %}

Before starting, a random joke on open sorce:-)

{% include elements/figure.html image="https://imgs.xkcd.com/comics/open_source.png" caption="May the source be with you!" %}

## git init

A bit background about my project. 

So astronomical data are huge and for their storage, transmission and processing, a standard file format called [FITS](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/FITS)(Flexible Image Transport System) is used. Now we can have these data either as a 2D image or tables format, both of which can be easily and efficiently stored and used in the FITS format.

{% include elements/figure.html image="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/FITS#/media/File:SAOImage-DS9.png" caption="Sample FITS file on SAOImage DS9 (Source : Wikipedia)" %}

My project aims at developing libraries for image registration and their non-linear transformations in the FITS format.
Image registration is done to transform different sets of data into one coordinate system. It is necessary in order to be able to compare and integrate the data obtained from different measurements and surveys. Non-linear warpings
on datasets is done to remove any distortions from optical instruments and then perform the required transformations to
synchronize the datasets in the same grid for proper evaluation. 

The problems with existing software are their monolithic style and lack of modularity to be used in other similar context.
This project tries to fix these problems by implementing high-level libraries and their integration in Gnuastro to provide multiple interface: as a CLI command and as a library.

## cat distortions.txt

Before actually starting with the image registration, it seemed apparent to first convert the WCS(World Coordinate System) in the image metadata/header to a common form of distortion coefficient as some of the tools that have similar purposes cannot be easily interchanged, owing to the lack of a common standard. Among the many distortions that are used, the most widely used are the SIP(Simple Imaging Polynomial) and TPV distortions. A full mathamatical treatement for the convertion is given in the paper below,

["More flexibility in representing geometric distortion in astronomical images,"

  Shupe, David L.; Laher, Russ R.; Storrie-Lombardi, Lisa; Surace, Jason; Grillmair, Carl;
  Levitan, David; Sesar, Branimir, 2012, in Software and Cyberinfrastructure for
  Astronomy II. Proceedings of the SPIE, Volume 8451, article id. 84511M.](http://web.ipac.caltech.edu/staff/shupe/reprints/SIP_to_PV_SPIE2012.pdf)

The actual equations for the convertion is given in Appendix of the paper. For implementing the equations in my code, I used a simple [python script](https://gitlab.com/sachinkumarsingh092/gnuastro-test-files/-/blob/master/scripts/equations.py) to generate all the equations in both TPV and SIP format given the CD and CD-inverse matrix. The whole repository before finally mearging to Gnuastro is hosted on my [Gitlab account](https://gitlab.com/sachinkumarsingh092/gnuastro-test-files).

## - valgrind --track-origin=yes ./bugs